---
title: 'My Manim Post-Production Workflow and Tips'
date: 2023-8-19
permalink: /posts/2023/8/blog-post-2/
tags:
  - manim
  - post-production
  - workflow
  - tips
---

I have recently finished publishing a [series of animated Linear Algebra videos on inner product spaces](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL91agCMqt_mdAgHZkxyn-tscoNpu7ZHvl), which were created with the animation tool [Manim](https://www.manim.community) and in collaboration with [Animathica](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCzkyH2bxpesubzc87VxqDiA) throughout three whole years. For each video, I wrote a script, directed a team of undergraduate students from UNAM's Faculty of Sciences as they begun to animate each scene, polished both the script and animations into their final form, recorded the script narration and background music, and edited everything together. I now want to write down some of what I've learned.

I firstly want to focus on my post-production workflow when using Manim, listing useful tips for each step:

1. Polish all `Scene` animations while narrating the script out loud.
    * For each animation segment that I want to sync up to a narration audio queue, I create a [`section`](https://docs.manim.community/en/stable/tutorials/output_and_config.html#sections) with the exact words that I want to sync it to as its name.
    * Near the beginning of each animation script, I define a `SKIP_DEFAULT = False` variable and add the argument `skip_animations=SKIP_DEFAULT` to each created `section`.
    * When I want to focus on animating a single section, I change the value of `SKIP_DEFAULT` to `True` and the value of the `skip_animations` parameter of that secition to `not SKIP_DEFAULT`; in this way, all other animations are bypassed when rendering. The same can be done for multiple consecutive sections.
    * If I am concerned with modifying a specific frame of animation, I comment out every subsequent animation in the sam scene (this can be done easily in [Vim](https://www.vim.org)) and render the last frame with the flag `-s` (**Note**: as of `Manim Community v0.17.3`, the previously mentioned `SKIP_DEFAULT` trick will unfortunately not work with the `-s` flag, which is why commenting out code is necessary here).
    * If I ever need to align the camera frame throughout a whole Scene, I change the Scene's class to [`MovingCameraScene`]((https://docs.manim.community/en/stable/reference/manim.scene.moving_camera_scene.MovingCameraScene.html) and move the camera with the `self.camera.frame.shift()` method _at the very beginning of the Scene_.
    * Finally, I make sure each `section` ends with a `self.wait()`, which will be useful later on.
    * Past this point, the idea is to only modify the duration of some _animations_ to perfectly sync them with the whole audio bits, but not modify `wait` times nor add premature section transitions (such as `FadeOut`s), as this can be done much more efficiently and with much greater flexibility inside the video editing software.
1. Record the narrations from the script while visualizing the corresponding animations fresh off my head.
    * While recording, I tap my microphone once each time I try a new take.
    * Afterwards, I import the recording into an audio editing software and edit it backwards, from finish to start, easily detecting and removing all erroneous takes, and further cleaning up the audio by reducing noise as much as possible.
1. Import the edited narration audio into the video editing software's project bin (I use [Kdenlive](https://kdenlive.org)) and drag it into the highest priority audio channel _as is_.
1. Generate and import low-quality animation placeholders, align them to the narration audio and edit the video's pacing.
    * I render all scenes using the `-ql --save_sections` flags, which whill render each `section` as a seperate low-quality animation and create a `.json` file with metadata, and import all of the animated `sections` into the project bin.
    * For each animated `section`, I drag it to the highest priority video channel and use the sections' names included in the corresponding scene's `.json` file to align it to the narration audio.
    * To perfect the video's pacing, I use kdenlive's "Spacer Tool".
    * **Note:** If any additional modifications should be done to the animations, they should be done **before the next step**. For animated sections that are already aligned to the audio, modifying their code and rerendering with the `-ql --save_sections` flag should update them while keeping their starting point in place. This is useful for perfectly syncing animated sections to whole audio bits.
1. Once animations are in their final form, render them in high quality and replace the low-quality placeholders.
    * For 4K quality, I use the `-qk --save_sections` flags.
    * I **create a backup video project file** and open it via a text editor, quickly replacing every instance of "480p15" (folders that `manim` creates for low-quality renders) with "2160p60" (folders for 4K renders).
    * I open the modified backup video project and change the project settings to 4K video. I then save, close and reopen the project.
1. Fill up the blank space and add background music!
    * For each animated `section` whose ending needs to be lengthened, I navigate to the final frame of animation and add it to the project bin (in kdenlive this can easily be done with the [extract frame to project](https://kdenlive.org/en/project/extract-frame-to-project) option).
    * I then drag each final frame to the lower priority video channel such that it starts before the corresponding `section`'s animation ends, and lengthen this final frame or add effects (such as Fadeouts) as needed.
    * I add background music.
1. Render the whole project.
    * In kdenlive, I generate a rendering script with my wanted characteristics.
    * I then restart my computer and, in a fresh session, open a virtual terminal and execute the script with `melt /path/to/generated/script.mlt`.

That's all for now. Next time, I might talk about the pre-production process; that is, how I go about writing the narration scripts for these videos!
